- [Thomas Jefferson]() writes of Cathcart, 10 February 1802: "he is personally known to me, & pretty well known. he is the honestest & ablest consul we have with the Barbary powers: a man of very sound judgment & fearless." (The Papers of Thomas Jefferson Digital Edition, ed. James P. McClure and J. Jefferson Looney. Charlottesville: University of Virginia Press, Rotunda, 2008–2016. Canonic URL: http://rotunda.upress.virginia.edu/founders/TSJN-01-36-02-0361 [accessed 25 Oct 2016])

- Appointed as consul to Algiers after [Richard O'Brien]() but the dey of Algiers would not recognize him; therefore he never assumed the position (BW2:128)
    - [Richard O'Brien]() lays out the reasons he thinks Cathcart isn't getting the position.
        1. He messed around with a Moorish woman in 1787.
        2. He schemed with the Portuguese to defraud the dey of $4000 or more in October 1800
        3. Algiers will not accept anyone who has been a consul at one of the other Barbary states, viewing it as beneath their dignity. They want a consul on par with one that might be sent to Constantinople or London. ([Richard O'Brien]() to [James Madison](), 16 September 1802. The Papers of James Madison Digital Edition, J. C. A. Stagg, editor. Charlottesville: University of Virginia Press, Rotunda, 2010. http://rotunda.upress.virginia.edu/founders/JSMN-02-91-02-0493)
    - BW2:348: Cathcart feels that his blacklisting is due to [Richard O'Brien]() and the [House of Bacri]() "who are not desirous that any person should be appointed possessed of sufficient intelhgence to investigate their iniquitous practices and the Jews are particularly interested in wishing to have the Consul of the United States entirely dependent on them" (25 January 1803)
    - BW2:3379: Continues to complain about how O'Brien and the Bacris are conspiring against him (30 March 1803)
    - BW2:487: SecState writes: "From the information the President has received of the probability of impediments being thrown into the way of the negotiation with Tripoli from your personal unacceptableness to the Bashaw, he has thought proper to place the powers for that purpose, formerly vested in you, in the hands of Mr. Lear. It is by no means meant that you should consider this change as a disapprobation of your former conduct, which has been marked with zeal & fidelity, or that the circumstance on which it is founded is at all attributable to your fault. It is possible also that you will view it in some some degree in the light of an accomodation by relieving you from the uncertainty of residence to which you have for more than two years been subjected, and leaving you at leasure to take upon yourself the consulate of Tunis" (16 July 1803)
- BW3:55: Cathcart requests that since he feels his usefulness in Barbary has come to an end, he might be considered for an appointment related to the acquisition of Louisiana (18 September 1803)